## Arborist Call 119 Notes 

Meeting Date/Time: 19th Febuary 2026, 21:00 UTC

Meeting Duration: 33 mins

Agenda:

Welcome and Meeting [Intro](https://github.com/ZcashCommunityGrants/arboretum-notes/new/main/AllArboristCallNotes#welcome--meeting-intro) 

Zebra Update [zebra 4.1.0,open Rpc](https://github.com/ZcashCommunityGrants/arboretum-notes/new/main/AllArboristCallNotes#zebra-update)

ZODL Update [zallet, orchard](https://github.com/ZcashCommunityGrants/arboretum-notes/new/main/AllArboristCallNotes#zodl-update-former-ecc)

Research & Implementation Updates - [zaino](https://github.com/ZcashCommunityGrants/arboretum-notes/new/main/AllArboristCallNotes#core-stack-updates-zingo-labs-zaino)/ [zcashD Deprecation](https://github.com/ZcashCommunityGrants/arboretum-notes/new/main/AllArboristCallNotes#zcash-deprecation-updates-zodlzf-zingo-labs-pacu) / [Nsm](https://github.com/ZcashCommunityGrants/arboretum-notes/new/main/AllArboristCallNotes#research--implementation-updates-shielded-labs--nsm) / [Trailing finality](https://github.com/ZcashCommunityGrants/arboretum-notes/new/main/AllArboristCallNotes#research--implementation-updates-shielded-labs-zodl-crosslink--trailing-finality-layer)

Open Announcements 

Open Discussion [script release](https://github.com/ZcashCommunityGrants/arboretum-notes/new/main/AllArboristCallNotes#open-discussion)

Video of the meeting: [recorded](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=63K9NUXicfI)

Moderator: Alex

Notes:chidi (X) @zcashNigeria

## Full Notes

## Welcome & Meeting Intro 

Alex: 00:02:35  

it's February 19, 2026 and this is the Zcash arborist call. Our Agenda starts with core stack updates with Zcash Foundation, former ECC, which I guess we can update this now, Zingo labs pacu, and then research and implementation updates with qedit ,shielded labs, shielded labs and former ECC, and then shield labs again with dynamic fees, and then open announcements and discussion. So what are arborist calls? Arborist calls are bi weekly calls where Zcash protocol contributors convene to discuss upgrade timelines and process protocol R and D efforts design and implementation of new protocol features and identify blockers and unresolved issues. The purpose is to make core Zcash development accessible for a wider set of participants and provide more transparency for the community at large. who can participate. Anyone interested in learning about Zcash protocol development can register at Zcasharborist.org if you want to suggest a topic for discussion or present an in depth agenda item relevant to the Zcash protocol, please email arboristcall@zfnd.org to request a slot, other ways to get involved are Zcash community grants zcg, Zcash R and D discord, visit the Zcash community forum, and then all these links are listed at Zcasharborist.org, so let's start with core stack updates, Zcash foundation with Zebra.

## Zebra Update 

Alfredo: 00:04:19  

Yeah, that's me. Thank you, Alex. Since the last arborist call, the exact day of the last arborist call, we released zebra 4. 1.0 and that release, which was after January, most of the team was on vacation, but the main improvements were in the prometheus metrics and  Grafana  we added some of the standard tests for transactions to enter the mempool, which were ported from Zcash D. So since then, we're moving open API support in favor of open RPC, which is the documentation framework that zallet was using, which is more appropriate for our RPC interface. So we now have an RPC. discover endpoint. All the work in zebra was merged, and we have pending one PR in zallet which will be good if someone can review, I paste a link for it in the chat. Okay, so that's that. Then we added another RPC method called get transaction out, which was kind of requested by different people using Zebra that were needed at so we have that now. We added a new state request called any chain block which was requested by the zaino team. So that's merged into zebra as well. We added a policy for AI agents for submitting code. I know other teams are doing the same. We were having a hard time trying to review the code generated by AI so we have some more clear rules of what to look before pushing a PR. We fix a compatibility mismatch between Zcash D and zebra in the get route transaction Rpc method, we fix  get block subsidy Rpc to support founder  rewards for all blocks. We then today we find out we have back there, but initially we were supporting that, then we have a lot of stuff in progress, but I guess it might be worth mentioning that we have a provenor PR for shielded Coinbase, and in order to merge that into  zebra, we need to create a release for Zcash script. There are several things that are stuck in for Zcash script release, so I was wondering if it is okay start with that release process soon. And then another thing to mention is that str4d had been  working on a Zcash integration test repository, which will allow us to remove all the Python QA stuff we had in zebra in favor of continuing the work in that new repository. So should be a PR soon to deprecate that into a zebra code base. And I think that's pretty much it all I had.

Alex: 00:07:37  

Thanks, Alfredo. Any questions for Alfredo? Great. So moving on to core stack updates with former ECC on Zcash D core libraries and Zallet

## ZODL Update (Former ECC) 

str4d  7:58  

Yeah, the former ECC should be renamed to zodl now since, so last couple of weeks, we have been continue to  work on Zallet and a bunch of the backend things related to that, as Alfredo mentioned my focus the last week and a bit or so has been getting the obviously, test framework working in a place where it can be used to test any of the z3 stack. And, yeah, we're now at a point where that can emerge. We have tests that actually pass in, as in, like, a status line that actually passes and a  bunch that don't, but they're the ones that will have to be migrated over time. But it means that anyone who is contributing to Zallet going forward, you can test your additions by writing new UTC tests over in that repo. And that stuff will then run. Can run against it, the Integration is a little bit janky at the moment in terms of, like, you have to go write the test, merge that, and then the merged test will work. I've got a task open to figure out a way to make it easier to to use branches and that. But that's that's something . We can work on our time. The main logic is working. We've also been making a bunch of changes in the core libraries for a couple of different bugs being fixed.  like in the incremental tree and shard tree handling, fixing some sort of long standing weird edge case bugs. So kris sorted those out recently. We have a bunch of review going on for the various third party PRs that have been opened on zallet. Thank you for those. Keep them coming and trying to think what else has come up? Oh yeah. And then as far as the zip side of things go, we've been having some more conversations around the extensible transaction format. There were some conversations with qedit earlier, as well as in the zip sync and some R and D meetings. And we've been refining and figuring out some of the edge cases to the approach, particularly where you potentially have multiple bundles that  could need to affect the same global state. The obvious example being an orchard bundle pre Zsa, and an orchard Zsa bundle post Zsa. So figuring out how the format would need to address and  handle those kinds of cases, particularly for wallets that understand the current like currency bundles, and then if a new bundle gets added, that in theory, would update, you know, affect existing states.  How does that process work? So we're working through the usual zip updating motions there,  refining motions there to make sure that the specs are solid. Anything else I'm forgetting daira

str4d  11:16  

in the R and D meeting, discussed devs shielded voting protocol thoughts. So there's some discussions happening in terms of approaches to enable using existing wallets to to generate voting proposals without needing to extract the seed phrase. So there's there's ongoing discussions there bad stuff happens at the R and D meetings. So if anyone here is interested in those and wants to attend and contribute, ping myself, or basically anyone else in the Zcash R D discord, and we can, we can get you an invite to those meetings.

Alex: 00:11:55  

Great. Thank you, Strad, any questions for Strad, Let's move on.  core stack updates with Zingo labs on Zaino, is somebody here from zingo

## core stack updates, zingo labs zaino

Hazel: 00:12:24  

We haven't released it yet, but we are at the point where it's just house keeping left, like all of the features are landed. It's just a matter of figuring out change log policy where we're pretty nailed down on change log policies and stuff, but it's just housekeeping left, so I expect zaino release very soon.

Alex: 00:12:57  

Great. Thank you, Hazel. Any questions for Hazel? Yeah,okay, next

## Zcash deprecation updates Zodl,Zf, zingo labs pacu

Pacu: 00:13:12  

All right, that's always a little bit of overlap here. So to add to what Hazel had to say. We are in the process of updating the zebra crates in Zaino, and I went through the process this time. So I want to do it this time, to learn about it, and, like, do a little bit of documentation testing and add more docs so anyone in the team can actually do it, because it's pretty like housekeeping is boring, as we all know, so I wanted to about to be a rotating task so there's no appointee of these kind of things, and everyone can have fun, and everyone can do like the boring stuff now and then. So we have some tests failing just one workflow that we're trying to find, if just a flex, if it is a flaky test or not, and then when we find out that, we will release zaino, with supporting the zebra, 4.10. So, yeah, nothing, nothing, break. Everything went pretty smoothly. So I expected, like more, like bigger bangs, but it wasn't the case. I'm pretty happy about it. What else I've been grooming the contributors board. I will write a little bit more about it on tomorrow's update for ZcashD deprecation  updates as every Friday. But we have received a lot of contributions, as strad said, and I'm like, just searching the DAG and the GitHub issues and trying to figure what are other like low hanging fruit, that community contributors can work on and tag them and put them on the board. So keep on coming as strad said, Thank you so much for the contributions, and yes, and I think that's pretty much it for this section of the call.

Alex: 00:15:58  

Any questions for Pacu? awesome. Thanks. Pacu Next so Zcash deprecation updates with qedit on zsas. Anybody from qedit here today doesn't look like it. Okay. Well, move on. If somebody comes, we'll slot them back in. So research and implementation updates with shielded labs on the network sustainability mechanism, yeah.

## Research & Implementation Updates Shielded labs- NSM

Jason: 00:16:33  

So the shielded labs team met in person last week in Mexico City. We did some planning sessions focused on 2026 road mapping and organizational strategy. So this week's updates on the NSM on cross link, dynamic fees are going to be lighter than usual. We have one update for the NSM on the engineering side, we've addressed feedback and updated the zip 234 and zip 235 implementation, PRs, again, Judo has pushed some additional changes since the last call, and now we're just waiting for those updates to be reviewed and merged into zebra. He also has reached out and plans to follow up with Conrado to discuss a few open questions about the implementation. 

Alex: 00:17:26  

Great questions for Jason. Great before we go on. Dara Emma, do you want to say or I can read this out, if that would help. So Dara Emma typed in the sync. In the zip sync meeting on Tuesday, we worked out in principle Modelo, some details how to maintain indistinguishability of orchard v6 transactions between wallets that understand zsas And those that don't even if zsas are deployed in a later upgrade then TX v6 no plain text, let lead byte zero by 03 this also has the important advantage that zEC only wallets will understand zEC notes sent to them in custom asset supporting bundles, which would otherwise have been a clear obstacle to to adoption. Thank you for posting that there Emma so research and implementation updates shielded labs and zodl crosslink, trailing finality layer

## Research & Implementation Updates Shielded labs, Zodl, Crosslink- Trailing Finality Layer

Nate: 00:18:29  

So the update from the shielded lab side is that last week we did an in person, and so that was pretty awesome. I think it was the first time our current team had all met each other. Lots of collaboration for crosslink. Specifically, a lot of our conversation was about this notion we have this year to sort of go from where we've been with parting testnets for each milestone. We want to extend that notion to begin to develop like production ready feature testnets. However, initially, what we're going to do is there'll be long running, but we are still going to skip the complexity of upgrade,  like in protocol upgrades initially. So we'll have what we call season testnets. Each milestone, we will start a new network, but we will also have a way to migrate your test net CtAs from previous iterations to newer ones. And then we also want to use a donation we've received from Buterin to see if we can add rewards or incentives that match the actual design of crosslink itself. And so we're aiming for that, yeah, and so the first iteration is going to be a minimum viable product, and we'll see how that goes and learn from it. So aside from that, we have started road mapping for the rest of the year. I'm still working on that, I'm likely going to want to reach out to, like people here or across other orgs for feedback on the process like, you know, as we approach a more mature feature, assuming that there is clear, widespread consensus to activate it, okay? And then what does that look like? What are the steps after that? Yeah, so the main focus for me right now is clarifying that roadmap, and then we'll post about that soon, and we'll likely be incorporating feedback on the roadmap. And meanwhile, the devs are working towards setting up that first seasonal, long running testnet. And there's many more things we plan to do this year. So one example is to start regularly showing up to the R and D meetings and getting wider review and discussion around cross link design and decisions, anything else there. I think that's it for my update.

Alex: 00:21:43  

Any questions for Nate? Thank you, Nate.

Nate: 00:21:59  

Actually daira Emma has audio problems, but has reached out with like feedback from the first audit. So yes, we're incorporating that. One thing hir was confused by is that there are already in the work of the TFL book that daira, Strad and I contributed to previously, it's already accounted for and worked through some things that were covered in the audit, this first game theoretic audit, and the rationale for how We got there is kind of a mix of things, but the general, the general, overarching story, is that we wanted to strip things down and then sort of get a review of, like a really simplified thing that is feature complete, and then use that as, like a stepping stone to reintroduce complexity with like more assurance and review that each piece is helpful, That's sort of the big picture story.

Alex: 00:23:15  

Great. Thanks, Nate, anyway,

Nate: 00: 23:23  

yeah, and we definitely appreciate daira's scrutiny and feedback, and hope to see more from her and others 

 ## Research & Implementation Updates Shielded labs- Dynamic fee

Jason: 00:23:48  

There's no update this week for dynamic fees. Mark will be back in two weeks to provide an update.

Alex: 00:23:56  

Open announcements. If you have some news or an announcement you'd like to share, please raise your hand once. Okay, open discussion. If there's a topic you'd like to raise for open discussion, please raise your hand

## Open Discussion

Alfredo: 00:24:18  

So to make a Zcash script release, I was wondering, maybe with the Strad, if you think it's okay to do so, we can kick off that. Or how do you see it? I know we have to do two versions release, I think, or rather mention it in one of the comments.

str4d  24:40  

So the So, the problem there is that because a 0.5 release was cut the main branches, version is 0.5 so we shouldn't cut a 0.4 release directly from main because that would mean that the version history in that repo goes backwards, which makes things just annoying from when you're dealing in the future with, like, if you're ever trying to do debugging of earlier states, and like, bisecting histories, Having something where the where the versions aren't like monotonically increasing just makes things really frustrating to deal with. So, so if we want that to go out into 0.4  then it should be back ported onto the 0.4 release, and then release from there, then merge that forward into

Alfredo: 00:25:39  

What if we if we go with 0.5

Str4d  25:43  

So again, this gets the problem of like 0.4 and 0.5 are currently identical, modular. I think one other little thing because of it, because the mistake was 0.5 was cut as 0.5 and the problem is that currently, the entire stack currently depends on 0.4 so those changes cannot be used in the current stack. Now that being said. So, so essentially, what it gets to is, every time we do one of these break and releases like it's Zcash script is quite far down in the stack of dependencies, like it's below a lot of LibrustZcash repo, so we cannot roll Zcash script out 0.5 out to people without also rolling Zcash transparent and Zcash keys and a bunch of other crates there. So you would be blocked on that. You wouldn't be able to access your cash from 0.5 until we do those updates, and then that can get into zebra. So that's the main reason.

Alfredo: 00:26:44  

Yeah, I think we need to figure out a way to do this. I don't know. It's too painful to go over the whole stack and convince people that they need to upgrade, so I'm not sure how to handle that, but in the future too. Yeah, go ahead. Yeah.

Str4d  27:03  

This is something we've been dealing with in the librustzcash crates for a long time now, and this is why we've we have developed the process we have for being able to do patch releases and and moving non breaking changes to those wherever possible, so that they don't block on the wider breaking changes, which also quite frequently happen in the main librustzcash repo. Unfortunately, GitHub doesn't give you easy tooling to work with this because, to work easily with this, because when you open a PR, by default, it will open against main but that's actually not what you want to do. Once you realize that something can be patch released, you actually want want to go and back port it onto the right branch to give to give it the visibility that it needs. So there's annoyances there.

Alfredo: 00:27:57  

So for this one, what do you recommend? Recommended, maybe the two versions.

Str4d  28:07  

I think at this point, the two things that have been proposed to be included are relatively small. So it would be very easy for someone to back port them to 0.4   and then the two just stay in sync for now, okay, whenever we get around to actually having something that we need to bring in.

Alfredo: 00:28:33  

Okay, cool. Thank you. I yeah, I opened an issue or something to get started on that. Thanks.

Alex: 00:28:44  

Aria, I think you're up next. You unmute? Yeah, if you're talking Aria, we can't hear you. Hmm.

Arya: 00: 29:03  

Okay, sorry. So in that case, I think  it would make sense to merge that PR into main with the patch dependencies while we wait for new releases on those other crates for the nsm pr against zebra, What's the plan? Are we just going to make sure that it's correct and merge it in its current state, or are we going to want to make changes on that branch to account for the extensible transaction format before it gets into main

Str4d  29:38  

I mean, as long as it's behind a if it's behind a compilation build flag, then it doesn't really matter. That's, yeah, we don't want it. We wouldn't want it to get into main like directly, without any compilation flags. But if it's behind a compilation flag, then we can change it whenever, because I don't think anything behind a compilation flag needs to have the same kind of like breaking versus non breaking considerances There we can be a little bit more tolerant of like breakage  for that in development stuff, in terms of like, you know, semver related breakage specifically.

Pacu: 00:30:26  

All right, yeah, I just wanted to bring up. I don't know if it's the right place to bring it up, earlier in the day, we had a nice discussion about the memo bundles zip and motivations for it to be included in Nu 7. I know that we are still waiting for feedback, and I don't know if there is any polling open yet, but I just want to bring up that we have people trying to develop  an application called zcat, for example, that will desperately need a memo on those to actually be a secure messenger. And these people are not trying to build, like, the next signal, or anything like that. They want to really focus on specific kind of messaging for areas that are, you know, subject to, like, difficult regimes and that they they need all the help they can get in terms of, like secure and private messaging, even though it's not like kind of like I am or or a fast kind of chatting, but just like very secure, asynchronous messaging. And I also wanted to to chime in and mention a few, a few ideas that I had for this feature. And I don't know if you know anyone else wants to discuss that.

Jason: 00:32:10  

I saw Dara Emma's comment about discussing devs shielded voting protocol in the most recent R and D meeting. I'm going to meet with Dev tomorrow to demo it and run through a test vote. I'm curious if you had any feedback for him on the voting protocol, like, was there any talk about testing the protocol or auditing the code. My opinion is, I think if we're going to use this in production, then we should parallel test it alongside Hans voting system, and then it should also be subject to an audit. And then my other question is, is there any plan for zodl wallet to integrate it

Str4d  33:01  

From the testing and feedback side of things, the feedback we were giving was at the level of, there isn't a full spec yet, or there isn't a speck of the degree that we'd be happy, happy with. So we were giving feedback on the on the overall design and like, so there's already been some sort of like, architectural changes suggested and various improvements that I think Dev is then planning on going back and making. So the current state of it is not the state that I expect it will end up being in, but they are moving pretty quickly. So we'll see what happens there. Some of the feedback that we gave was from the perspective of, like, what would be necessary to enable it to be to be deployed in something like Zodl. I can't give commitments one way or the other, because I'm not the product manager. But from it, from an engineering perspective, I I was giving feedback that would enable that to be possible. Okay,

Alex: 00:34:08  

other topics for open discussion.

Hazel: 00:34:16  

I meant to put a hand up I want to mention the Nu 7 sentiment polling. Vote closes tomorrow.

Alex: 00:34:23  

Yep, absolutely. If you're on zcap, please vote and the coin holder vote is open and various other ones as well. So participate where you're eligible to do so please. And I wanted to note that Dara Emma had mentioned in the chat about discussing AI. I think maybe we should wait till for a future meeting when dare Emma is able to participate fully in that conversation. We can get out on an agenda, but definitely something that would be good to discuss in this group. I think so. Anything else for today, for open discussion? Question.

Alex: 00:35:06  

Great. So next arborist, call be March 5 at 1500 UTC and thank you for participating and attending. Appreciate it.

Next Meeting Scheduled: 5th March 2026, 15:00 UTC

